README.md, before:

# react-stonecutter
<a href="http://dantrain.github.io/react-stonecutter" title="Demo"><img align="left" src="http://i.imgur.com/HrICPRB.png" width="120" hspace="10"></a>

Animated grid layout component for React, inspired by [Masonry](http://masonry.desandro.com/).  
Choose between CSS Transitions or [React-Motion](https://github.com/chenglou/react-motion) for animation.

[Demo](http://dantrain.github.io/react-stonecutter)  

## Installation

With [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-stonecutter):

```
npm install --save react-stonecutter
```

## Usage

A simple layout with items of equal height:

```js
import { SpringGrid } from 'react-stonecutter';
```
```xml
<SpringGrid
  component="ul"
  columns={5}
  columnWidth={150}
  gutterWidth={5}
  gutterHeight={5}
  itemHeight={200}
  springConfig={{ stiffness: 170, damping: 26 }}
>
  <li key="A">A</li>
  <li key="B">B</li>
  <li key="C">C</li>
</SpringGrid>
```

A Pinterest-style layout with varying item heights, this time using CSS transitions:

```js
import { CSSGrid, layout } from 'react-stonecutter';
```
```xml
<CSSGrid
  component="ul"
  columns={5}
  columnWidth={150}
  gutterWidth={5}
  gutterHeight={5}
  layout={layout.pinterest}
  duration={800}
  easing="ease-out"
>
  <li key="A" itemHeight={150}>A</li>
  <li key="B" itemHeight={120}>B</li>
  <li key="C" itemHeight={170}>C</li>
</CSSGrid>
```

If you don't know the heights of your items ahead of time, use the `measureItems` higher-order component to measure them in the browser before layout:

```js
import { SpringGrid, measureItems } from 'react-stonecutter';

const Grid = measureItems(SpringGrid);
```
```xml
<Grid
  // ...etc.
>
  <li key="A">Who controls the British crown?</li>
  <li key="B">Who keeps the metric system down?</li>
  <li key="C">We do!</li>
  <li key="D">We do!</li>
</Grid>
```

If your grid spans the page and you want to vary the number of columns based on the viewport width, use the `makeResponsive` higher-order component which makes use of [enquire.js](http://wicky.nillia.ms/enquire.js/):
```js
import { CSSGrid, measureItems, makeResponsive } from 'react-stonecutter';

const Grid = makeResponsive(measureItems(CSSGrid), {
  maxWidth: 1920,
  minPadding: 100
});
```

## API Reference

Exports:
* `SpringGrid`
* `CSSGrid`
* `measureItems`
* `makeResponsive`
* `layout`
* `enterExitStyle`
* `easings`

### SpringGrid and CSSGrid props

**columns={`Number`}**  
Number of columns. Required.  
You can wrap the Grid component in the `makeResponsive` higher-order component to set this dynamically.

**columnWidth={`Number`}**  
Width of a single column, by default in `px` units. Required.

**gutterWidth={`Number`}**  
Width of space between columns. Default: `0`.

**gutterHeight={`Number`}**  
Height of vertical space between items. Default: `0`.

**component={`String`}**  
Change the HTML tagName of the Grid element, for example to `'ul'` or `'ol'` for a list. Default: `'div'`.

**layout={`Function`}**  
Use one of the included layouts, or create your own. Defaults to a 'simple' layout with items of fixed height.  
Included layouts:
```js
import { layout } from 'react-stonecutter';

const { simple, pinterest } = layout;
```

The function is passed two parameters; an `Array` of the props of each item, and the props of the Grid itself.
It must return an object with this shape:
```js
{
  positions: // an Array of [x, y] coordinate pairs like this: [[0, 0], [20, 0], [0, 30]]
  gridWidth: // width of the entire grid (Number)
  gridHeight: // height of the entire grid (Number)
}
```
Have a look at the code for the included layouts to get a feel for creating your own.

**enter={`Function`}**  
**entered={`Function`}**  
**exit={`Function`}**  
These allow you to change how items animate as they appear and disappear from the grid.
Supply functions that return objects with the `opacity` and `transform` values for an item's start and end states.
By default the item's `scale` and `opacity` go from `0` to `1` and back to `0` on exit, like this:
```js
enter={() => ({ scale: 0, opacity: 0 })}
entered={() => ({ scale: 1, opacity: 1 })}
exit={() => ({ scale: 0, opacity: 0 })}
```
The functions are passed three parameters, the item props, grid props and grid state which includes the current height and width of the grid. For example to have disappearing items fall off the bottom of the grid:
```js
exit={(itemProps, gridProps, gridState) => ({ translateY: gridState.gridHeight + 500 })}
```
CSS [`transform-functions`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function) are split up so they can be easily animated individually. Supported functions:
* `translateX`
* `translateY`
* `translateZ`
* `skew`
* `skewX`
* `skewY`
* `scale`
* `scaleX`
* `scaleY`
* `rotate`
* `rotateX`
* `rotateY`  

Some example functions are included:
```js
import { enterExitStyle } from 'react-stonecutter';

const { enter, entered, exit } = enterExitStyle.foldUp;
```
Check out the [demo](http://dantrain.github.io/react-stonecutter) to see them in action.

**perspective={`Number`}**  
The [`perspective`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/perspective) distance used for 3D transforms. If you are using a transform function like `rotateX`, use this to strengthen the effect. Default is no perspective applied.

**lengthUnit={`String`}**  
The [length](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/length) unit used throughout. Default: `'px'`. Experimental. You could try using `'em'` or `'rem'` and then adjust the `font-size` for a fluid layout, but it may not work well with the `measureItems` and `makeResponsive` higher-order components. `%` does not work well due to the way CSS transforms work.

**angleUnit={`String`}**  
The [angle](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/angle) unit. Affects `transform-functions` such as `rotate`. Default: `'deg'`.

### SpringGrid only props

**springConfig={`Object`}**  
Configuration of the React-Motion spring. See the [React-Motion docs](https://github.com/chenglou/react-motion#helpers) for more info.
Default: `{ stiffness: 60, damping: 14, precision: 0.1 }`.

### CSSGrid only props

**duration={`Number`}**  
Animation duration in `ms`. Required.

**easing={`String`}**  
Animation easing function in CSS [transition-timing-function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/CSS/transition-timing-function) format. Some [Penner easings](https://matthewlein.com/ceaser/) are included for convenience:
```js
import { easings } from 'react-stonecutter';

const { quadIn, quadOut, /* ..etc. */  } = easings;
```
Default: `easings.cubicOut`.

### makeResponsive options
Pass like this:
```js
const Grid = makeResponsive(SpringGrid, { maxWidth: 1920 })
```

**maxWidth: `Number`**  
Maximum width for the Grid in `px`.

**minPadding: `Number`**  
Minimum horizontal length between the edge of the Grid and the edge of the viewport in `px`. Default: `0`.

**defaultColumns: `Number`**  
Default number of columns before the breakpoints kick in. May be useful when rendering server-side in a universal app. Default: `4`.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add alternatives section to readme

README.md, after:

# react-stonecutter
<a href="http://dantrain.github.io/react-stonecutter" title="Demo"><img align="left" src="http://i.imgur.com/HrICPRB.png" width="120" hspace="10"></a>

Animated grid layout component for React, inspired by [Masonry](http://masonry.desandro.com/).  
Choose between CSS Transitions or [React-Motion](https://github.com/chenglou/react-motion) for animation.

[Demo](http://dantrain.github.io/react-stonecutter)  

## Installation

With [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-stonecutter):

```
npm install --save react-stonecutter
```

## Usage

A simple layout with items of equal height:

```js
import { SpringGrid } from 'react-stonecutter';
```
```xml
<SpringGrid
  component="ul"
  columns={5}
  columnWidth={150}
  gutterWidth={5}
  gutterHeight={5}
  itemHeight={200}
  springConfig={{ stiffness: 170, damping: 26 }}
>
  <li key="A">A</li>
  <li key="B">B</li>
  <li key="C">C</li>
</SpringGrid>
```

A Pinterest-style layout with varying item heights, this time using CSS transitions:

```js
import { CSSGrid, layout } from 'react-stonecutter';
```
```xml
<CSSGrid
  component="ul"
  columns={5}
  columnWidth={150}
  gutterWidth={5}
  gutterHeight={5}
  layout={layout.pinterest}
  duration={800}
  easing="ease-out"
>
  <li key="A" itemHeight={150}>A</li>
  <li key="B" itemHeight={120}>B</li>
  <li key="C" itemHeight={170}>C</li>
</CSSGrid>
```

If you don't know the heights of your items ahead of time, use the `measureItems` higher-order component to measure them in the browser before layout:

```js
import { SpringGrid, measureItems } from 'react-stonecutter';

const Grid = measureItems(SpringGrid);
```
```xml
<Grid
  // ...etc.
>
  <li key="A">Who controls the British crown?</li>
  <li key="B">Who keeps the metric system down?</li>
  <li key="C">We do!</li>
  <li key="D">We do!</li>
</Grid>
```

If your grid spans the page and you want to vary the number of columns based on the viewport width, use the `makeResponsive` higher-order component which makes use of [enquire.js](http://wicky.nillia.ms/enquire.js/):
```js
import { CSSGrid, measureItems, makeResponsive } from 'react-stonecutter';

const Grid = makeResponsive(measureItems(CSSGrid), {
  maxWidth: 1920,
  minPadding: 100
});
```

## API Reference

Exports:
* `SpringGrid`
* `CSSGrid`
* `measureItems`
* `makeResponsive`
* `layout`
* `enterExitStyle`
* `easings`

### SpringGrid and CSSGrid props

**columns={`Number`}**  
Number of columns. Required.  
You can wrap the Grid component in the `makeResponsive` higher-order component to set this dynamically.

**columnWidth={`Number`}**  
Width of a single column, by default in `px` units. Required.

**gutterWidth={`Number`}**  
Width of space between columns. Default: `0`.

**gutterHeight={`Number`}**  
Height of vertical space between items. Default: `0`.

**component={`String`}**  
Change the HTML tagName of the Grid element, for example to `'ul'` or `'ol'` for a list. Default: `'div'`.

**layout={`Function`}**  
Use one of the included layouts, or create your own. Defaults to a 'simple' layout with items of fixed height.  
Included layouts:
```js
import { layout } from 'react-stonecutter';

const { simple, pinterest } = layout;
```

The function is passed two parameters; an `Array` of the props of each item, and the props of the Grid itself.
It must return an object with this shape:
```js
{
  positions: // an Array of [x, y] coordinate pairs like this: [[0, 0], [20, 0], [0, 30]]
  gridWidth: // width of the entire grid (Number)
  gridHeight: // height of the entire grid (Number)
}
```
Have a look at the code for the included layouts to get a feel for creating your own.

**enter={`Function`}**  
**entered={`Function`}**  
**exit={`Function`}**  
These allow you to change how items animate as they appear and disappear from the grid.
Supply functions that return objects with the `opacity` and `transform` values for an item's start and end states.
By default the item's `scale` and `opacity` go from `0` to `1` and back to `0` on exit, like this:
```js
enter={() => ({ scale: 0, opacity: 0 })}
entered={() => ({ scale: 1, opacity: 1 })}
exit={() => ({ scale: 0, opacity: 0 })}
```
The functions are passed three parameters, the item props, grid props and grid state which includes the current height and width of the grid. For example to have disappearing items fall off the bottom of the grid:
```js
exit={(itemProps, gridProps, gridState) => ({ translateY: gridState.gridHeight + 500 })}
```
CSS [`transform-functions`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function) are split up so they can be easily animated individually. Supported functions:
* `translateX`
* `translateY`
* `translateZ`
* `skew`
* `skewX`
* `skewY`
* `scale`
* `scaleX`
* `scaleY`
* `rotate`
* `rotateX`
* `rotateY`  

Some example functions are included:
```js
import { enterExitStyle } from 'react-stonecutter';

const { enter, entered, exit } = enterExitStyle.foldUp;
```
Check out the [demo](http://dantrain.github.io/react-stonecutter) to see them in action.

**perspective={`Number`}**  
The [`perspective`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/perspective) distance used for 3D transforms. If you are using a transform function like `rotateX`, use this to strengthen the effect. Default is no perspective applied.

**lengthUnit={`String`}**  
The [length](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/length) unit used throughout. Default: `'px'`. Experimental. You could try using `'em'` or `'rem'` and then adjust the `font-size` for a fluid layout, but it may not work well with the `measureItems` and `makeResponsive` higher-order components. `%` does not work well due to the way CSS transforms work.

**angleUnit={`String`}**  
The [angle](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/angle) unit. Affects `transform-functions` such as `rotate`. Default: `'deg'`.

### SpringGrid only props

**springConfig={`Object`}**  
Configuration of the React-Motion spring. See the [React-Motion docs](https://github.com/chenglou/react-motion#helpers) for more info.
Default: `{ stiffness: 60, damping: 14, precision: 0.1 }`.

### CSSGrid only props

**duration={`Number`}**  
Animation duration in `ms`. Required.

**easing={`String`}**  
Animation easing function in CSS [transition-timing-function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/CSS/transition-timing-function) format. Some [Penner easings](https://matthewlein.com/ceaser/) are included for convenience:
```js
import { easings } from 'react-stonecutter';

const { quadIn, quadOut, /* ..etc. */  } = easings;
```
Default: `easings.cubicOut`.

### makeResponsive options
Pass like this:
```js
const Grid = makeResponsive(SpringGrid, { maxWidth: 1920 })
```

**maxWidth: `Number`**  
Maximum width for the Grid in `px`.

**minPadding: `Number`**  
Minimum horizontal length between the edge of the Grid and the edge of the viewport in `px`. Default: `0`.

**defaultColumns: `Number`**  
Default number of columns before the breakpoints kick in. May be useful when rendering server-side in a universal app. Default: `4`.

## Alternatives

If you have a list already nicely laid out by the browser, check out [React Flip Move](https://github.com/joshwcomeau/react-flip-move) which uses the very cool FLIP technique.

## License

MIT
